Experiment 11
Transfer Files Using Shared Folder / GUI Tool
Aim

To transfer files between host and virtual machines using shared folders and GUI-based tools such as WinSCP.

Theory

In virtualization environments, file transfer between host systems and virtual machines is often required.

A shared folder allows files to be accessed by both the host system and the virtual machine without using network transfer tools.

GUI-based tools such as WinSCP provide an easy interface for transferring files between systems using secure protocols like SSH.

Shared folders are commonly supported by virtualization platforms such as:

Oracle VM VirtualBox
VMware Workstation

These tools simplify file transfer in local lab environments.

Requirements
Virtual machine installed using Oracle VM VirtualBox or VMware Workstation
Linux virtual machine
Host operating system (Windows/Linux/macOS)
File to transfer
Procedure
Step 1: Create a Shared Folder on Host System

Create a folder on the host machine.

Example:

Shared_Folder

Place a file inside this folder.

Example file:

sample.txt
Step 2: Configure Shared Folder in Virtual Machine

Open the virtualization software.

Example: Oracle VM VirtualBox

Select the virtual machine.
Click Settings.
Go to:
Shared Folders
Click Add new shared folder.

Configure the following:

Folder path : Shared_Folder
Folder name : shared
Auto-mount : Enabled
Make permanent : Enabled

Click OK.

Step 3: Start the Virtual Machine

Start the Linux virtual machine.

After login, the shared folder will automatically appear.

Example location:

/media/sf_shared
Step 4: Access Shared Folder in Linux VM

Open terminal and navigate to the folder:

cd /media/sf_shared

List files:

ls

You should see:

sample.txt
Step 5: Copy File to VM

Copy the file from shared folder to home directory:

cp sample.txt ~/sample.txt

Verify file:

ls
Step 6: Transfer Files Using WinSCP (Optional)

Install WinSCP on the host machine.

Open WinSCP and configure connection.

Example configuration:

File protocol : SFTP
Host name : VM IP Address
Port number : 22
Username : user
Password : password

Click Login.

WinSCP will show two panels:

Left panel → Host files
Right panel → VM files

Files can be transferred using drag and drop.

Output

The file sample.txt is successfully transferred between the host machine and the virtual machine using shared folder or WinSCP.

Commands Used
cd /media/sf_shared
ls
cp sample.txt ~/sample.txt
Result

Files were successfully transferred between the host system and virtual machine using shared folders and GUI-based tools.

Viva Voce Questions and Answers
1. What is a shared folder?

A shared folder is a directory that can be accessed by both the host system and virtual machine for easy file transfer.

2. Difference between SCP and shared folder
SCP	Shared Folder
Requires network connection	Works locally inside virtualization
Command-line based	Direct folder access
Uses SSH	Uses virtualization features
3. What is WinSCP?

**WinSCP is a graphical file transfer tool used to transfer files between a local computer and remote servers using secure protocols.

4. Advantages of GUI-based file transfer tools

Advantages include:

Easy drag-and-drop interface
User-friendly
No command-line knowledge required
5. Is shared folder secure?

Shared folders are secure in local environments but should be configured carefully to avoid unauthorized access.

6. When is cloud storage used for file transfer?

Cloud storage is used when files need to be transferred between systems located in different networks or geographic locations.

7. Which virtualization tools support shared folders?

Examples include:

Oracle VM VirtualBox
VMware Workstation
8. Difference between host-to-VM and VM-to-VM transfer
Host-to-VM	VM-to-VM
Files transferred from host system to virtual machine	Files transferred between two virtual machines
9. What protocol does WinSCP use?

**WinSCP uses secure protocols such as:

SFTP
SCP
FTP
10. Which method is best for local labs?

Shared folders are usually the best method for local labs because they are simple and do not require network configuration.
